{{Infobox proglang
|name = Zymbol-Lang
|paradigms = [[Imperative]], [[Functional]], [[Procedural]]
|author = [[User:Zymbol-Lang|Zymbol-Lang]]
|year = 2025
|typesystem = [[Dynamic typing|Dynamic]]
|memsystem = Automatic (Rust-managed)
|class = [[Turing complete]]
|reference implementation = [https://github.com/Zenith-Lang-Org/zymbol-lang Zymbol-Lang interpreter (Rust)]
|dialects =
|influenced by = [[Haskell]], [[Ruby]], [[Rust (programming language)|Rust]]
|files = .zy
}}

'''Zymbol-Lang''' is a minimalist symbolic programming language designed to be completely language-agnostic. It uses no English keywords — every control structure, I/O operation, and type marker is a symbol. Identifiers (variable names, function names, comments) can be written in any human language or script, including full Unicode support for CJK, Arabic, Devanagari, Cyrillic, Cherokee Syllabics, Cree Syllabics, emoji, and fictional scripts such as Klingon pIqaD.

The core philosophy: ''operators are universal, identifiers are yours''.

== Overview ==

Zymbol-Lang has two reference implementations:

* A tree-walking interpreter written in Rust (production-ready)
* A register-based virtual machine (experimental, ~4x speedup on recursion benchmarks)

The language specification is defined in a formal EBNF grammar (v1.7.0). Source files use the <code>.zy</code> extension.

=== Design Principles ===

# '''No keywords''' — <code>?</code> is if, <code>@</code> is loop, <code><~</code> is return. Nothing to translate.
# '''Full Unicode''' — variable names, function names, comments, and string values accept any Unicode character.
# '''Language-agnostic types''' — <code>#1</code> / <code>#0</code> instead of <code>true</code> / <code>false</code>; type tags use symbols (<code>###</code>, <code>##"</code>, <code>##?</code>...).
# '''Consistent operators''' — the same symbol means the same thing in every human language.

== Syntax ==

=== Operators Reference ===

{| class="wikitable"
|-
! Category !! Operator !! Meaning
|-
| Assignment || <code>=</code> || Mutable variable
|-
| Assignment || <code>:=</code> || Immutable constant
|-
| Output || <code>>></code> || Print (no auto-newline)
|-
| Newline || <code>¶</code> or <code>\</code> || Explicit newline in output
|-
| Input || <code><<</code> || Read from stdin
|-
| If || <code>?</code> || Conditional (if)
|-
| Else if || <code>_?</code> || Else-if branch
|-
| Else || <code>_</code> || Else branch
|-
| Match || <code>??</code> || Pattern match / switch
|-
| Loop || <code>@</code> || Loop (while / for-each / range)
|-
| Break || <code>@!</code> || Break out of loop
|-
| Continue || <code>@></code> || Continue to next iteration
|-
| Lambda || <code>-></code> || Anonymous function (lambda)
|-
| Return || <code><~</code> || Return value from function / lambda
|-
| Pipe || <code>\|></code> || Pipe value into function
|-
| Length || <code>$#</code> || Length of array or string
|-
| Append || <code>$+</code> || Append to array
|-
| Remove || <code>$-</code> || Remove element from array
|-
| Update || <code>$~</code> || Update element in array
|-
| Contains || <code>$?</code> || Test membership
|-
| Slice || <code>$[s..e]</code> || Slice array or string
|-
| Map || <code>$></code> || Map over array
|-
| Filter || <code>$\|</code> || Filter array
|-
| Reduce || <code>$<</code> || Reduce array
|-
| Try || <code>!?{ }</code> || Try block (error handling)
|-
| Catch || <code>:! ##Type { }</code> || Catch specific error type
|-
| Finally || <code>:>{ }</code> || Finally block
|-
| Is error || <code>$!</code> || Check if value is an error
|-
| Propagate || <code>$!!</code> || Propagate error to caller
|-
| Module declare || <code>#</code> || Declare module name
|-
| Export || <code>#>{ }</code> || Export symbols
|-
| Import || <code><#</code> || Import module
|-
| Alias || <code><=</code> || Import alias
|-
| Module call || <code>::</code> || Call module function
|-
| Field access || <code>.</code> || Access tuple field or module member
|}

=== Type System ===

Types are dynamic. Type metadata is accessed via the postfix operator <code>#?</code>.

{| class="wikitable"
|-
! Type !! Literal Example !! Type Tag
|-
| Integer || <code>42</code>, <code>-7</code>, <code>0xFF</code> || <code>###</code>
|-
| Float || <code>3.14</code>, <code>1.5e10</code> || <code>##.</code>
|-
| String || <code>"hello"</code> || <code>##"</code>
|-
| Char || <code>'A'</code> || <code>##'</code>
|-
| Bool || <code>#1</code>, <code>#0</code> || <code>##?</code>
|-
| Array || <code>[1, 2, 3]</code> || <code>##]</code>
|-
| Tuple || <code>(a, b)</code>, <code>(x: 1, y: 2)</code> || <code>##)</code>
|-
| Unit || (no value) || <code>##_</code>
|}

Integer literals support <code>0b</code> (binary), <code>0o</code> (octal), <code>0d</code> (decimal), <code>0x</code> (hexadecimal) prefixes.

=== Scoping ===

* '''Functions''' have isolated scopes — no implicit closure capture for named functions.
* '''Lambdas''' capture variables from the enclosing scope (closure).
* '''Blocks''' <code>{ }</code> use lexical scoping with automatic cleanup on exit.

== Examples ==

=== Hello, World! ===

<pre>
>> "Hello, World!" ¶
</pre>

The same program in Japanese:

<pre>
>> "こんにちは、世界！" ¶
</pre>

In Arabic (right-to-left identifiers, same operators):

<pre>
تحية = "مرحبا، أيها العالم!"
>> تحية ¶
</pre>

=== Variables and Constants ===

<pre>
x = 42           // mutable variable
PI := 3.14159    // immutable constant
name = "Alice"
active = #1      // boolean true
</pre>

=== Control Flow ===

<pre>
x = 7

? x > 0 {
    >> "positive" ¶
} _? x < 0 {
    >> "negative" ¶
} _ {
    >> "zero" ¶
}
</pre>

=== Pattern Matching ===

<pre>
grade = ?? score {
    90..100 : 'A'
    80..89  : 'B'
    70..79  : 'C'
    _       : 'F'
}
</pre>

=== Loops ===

<pre>
// Range loop — 0 through 4 inclusive
@ i:0..4 { >> i " " }
>> ¶

// While-style
n = 1
@ n <= 1024 { n *= 2 }

// For-each over array
fruits = ["apple", "banana", "mango"]
@ item:fruits { >> item ¶ }

// For-each over string characters
@ c:"hello" { >> c "-" }
</pre>

=== Functions and Lambdas ===

<pre>
// Named function
add(a, b) { <~ a + b }
>> add(3, 4) ¶    // → 7

// Lambda (implicit return)
double = x -> x * 2
>> double(5) ¶    // → 10

// Block lambda (explicit return)
classify = x -> {
    ? x > 0 { <~ "positive" }
    _? x < 0 { <~ "negative" }
    <~ "zero"
}

// Higher-order functions
nums = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10]
doubled = nums$> (x -> x * 2)
evens   = nums$| (x -> x % 2 == 0)
total   = nums$< (0, (acc, x) -> acc + x)
>> total ¶    // → 55

// Closure / factory
make_adder(n) { <~ x -> x + n }
add10 = make_adder(10)
>> add10(5) ¶    // → 15
</pre>

=== FizzBuzz ===

<pre>
fizzbuzz(n) {
    ? n % 15 == 0 { <~ "FizzBuzz" }
    _? n % 3  == 0 { <~ "Fizz" }
    _? n % 5  == 0 { <~ "Buzz" }
    _ { <~ n }
}

@ i:1..20 { >> fizzbuzz(i) ¶ }
</pre>

=== Error Handling ===

<pre>
!? {
    data = read_file("config.txt")
} :! ##IO {
    >> "File not found" ¶
} :! ##Parse {
    >> "Parse error" ¶
} :! {
    >> "Unknown error: " _err ¶
} :> {
    >> "Cleanup done" ¶
}
</pre>

Error types: <code>##IO</code>, <code>##Network</code>, <code>##Parse</code>, <code>##Index</code>, <code>##Type</code>, <code>##Div</code>, <code>##_</code> (generic catch-all).

=== Modules ===

<pre>
// lib/math.zy
# math
#> { add, get_PI }

_PI := 3.14159
add(a, b) { <~ a + b }
get_PI()   { <~ _PI  }
</pre>

<pre>
// main.zy
<# ./lib/math <= m

>> m::add(5, 3) ¶    // → 8
pi = m::get_PI()
>> pi ¶               // → 3.14159
</pre>

=== Named Tuples ===

<pre>
person = (name: "Alice", age: 25)
>> person.name ¶    // → Alice
>> person[0] ¶      // → Alice (index access also works)
</pre>

== Computational Class ==

Zymbol-Lang is [[Turing complete]]. It supports:

* Unbounded loops (<code>@</code> with arbitrary while-conditions)
* Arbitrary recursion (with tail-call optimization in the VM backend)
* Dynamic arrays of unlimited size
* Integer arithmetic without fixed bounds (64-bit signed integers)

== Internationalization ==

A key feature of Zymbol-Lang is the RosettaStone test suite — 105 programs written in 105 different human languages and scripts, all producing identical output. Languages include Plains Cree (both SRO and Syllabics), Cherokee, Klingon pIqaD, Quenya, Na'vi, Dothraki, Arabic, Hebrew, Georgian, Armenian, Japanese, Korean, Burmese, Thai, and many more.

The [https://zenith-lang-org.github.io/zymbol-lang-web/ Zymbol-Lang web documentation] provides full language manuals in over 100 languages, each with code examples using identifiers native to that script.

== Implementation ==

The reference implementation is written in [[Rust (programming language)|Rust]] and consists of:

* '''Lexer / Parser''' — produces an AST from <code>.zy</code> source
* '''Tree-walking interpreter''' — production interpreter, fully featured
* '''Bytecode compiler + Register VM''' — experimental backend (~4× faster on recursive benchmarks)

The interpreter is available as a CLI tool:

<pre>
zymbol run program.zy          # tree-walker (default)
zymbol run --vm program.zy     # register VM (experimental)
</pre>

== See Also ==

* [[Brainfuck]] — another language with a minimal operator set
* [[Befunge]] — symbolic, stack-based esolang
* [[Unlambda]] — purely functional with minimal syntax

== External Links ==

* [https://github.com/Zenith-Lang-Org/zymbol-lang Source code (GitHub)]
* [https://zenith-lang-org.github.io/zymbol-lang-web/ Interactive documentation (105 languages)]
* [https://github.com/Zenith-Lang-Org/zymbol-lang/blob/main/zymbol.ebnf Formal EBNF grammar (v1.7.0)]

[[Category:Languages]]
[[Category:2025]]
[[Category:Implemented]]
[[Category:Turing complete]]
[[Category:Functional]]
[[Category:Imperative]]
[[Category:Dynamic typing]]
[[Category:Rust]]
[[Category:Unicode]]
