{{Infobox programming language
| name                   = Zymbol
| paradigm               = [[Multi-paradigm programming language|Multi-paradigm]]: [[imperative programming|imperative]], [[functional programming|functional]], [[procedural programming|procedural]]
| designer               = OscarE.EspinozaB
| developer              = OscarE.EspinozaB (design) · [[Claude Code]] (implementation)
| first_appeared         = 2026
| latest_release_version = 0.0.5
| latest_release_date    = {{Start date and age|2026|df=yes}}
| typing                 = [[Dynamic typing|Dynamic]]
| platform               = [[Cross-platform]]
| license                = [[GNU Affero General Public License|AGPL-3.0-or-later]]
| file_ext               = .zy
| website                = {{URL|https://zymbol-lang.org}}
| implementations        =
| dialects               =
| influenced_by          = [[Haskell]], [[Ruby (programming language)|Ruby]], [[Rust (programming language)|Rust]], [[Perl]], [[ABAP]]
| influenced             =
}}

'''Zymbol''' (also referred to as '''Zymbol-Lang''') is an [[esoteric programming language]] and [[open-source software|open-source]] [[interpreter (computing)|interpreted]] programming language designed to be entirely free of human-language keywords. Every control structure, I/O operation, and type marker is expressed as a symbol, allowing programs to be written using identifiers in any [[Unicode]] script — including [[Latin script|Latin]], [[Arabic script|Arabic]], [[CJK characters|CJK]], [[Devanagari]], [[Cyrillic script|Cyrillic]], [[Cherokee syllabary|Cherokee Syllabics]], [[Unified Canadian Aboriginal Syllabics|Cree Syllabics]], and [[Klingon language|Klingon]] pIqaD.<ref>{{cite web |title=Zymbol-Lang |url=https://esolangs.org/wiki/Zymbol-Lang |website=Esolangs |access-date=2026-04-02}}</ref>

The core design principle of Zymbol is that ''operators are universal, identifiers are yours'': the symbolic grammar is fixed and language-agnostic, while all naming is left to the programmer's language of choice.

The design is intentional and rigorous, authored by [https://github.com/zymbol-lang/interpreter/commits?author=OscarEEspinozaB OscarE.EspinozaB], who defined the language specification, philosophy, and architecture. The implementation — compiler, register VM, LSP server, VS Code extension, and web playground — was carried out in 2026 using [[Claude Code]] as the engineering team: the AI executed the designer's detailed specifications rather than originating them. Delivering a complete toolchain of this scope as a solo project would have been economically and practically out of reach without AI assistance; Claude Code made that scale achievable for one person.

Zymbol does not aim for mass adoption. Its purpose is a proof of concept: demonstrating that a high-level, general-purpose esolang can be genuinely functional in the real world while remaining syntactically independent of any human language. Working GitHub projects — modest in scope but entirely operational — show that the idea holds in practice. The language invites curiosity: this is not AI-generated slop, but a meticulous, carefully guided design that used AI as a capable and disciplined engineering partner. Without that partnership, none of it would exist.

The reference implementation is written in [[Rust (programming language)|Rust]] and is currently in public alpha (version 0.0.5).<ref>{{cite web |title=zymbol-lang/interpreter |url=https://github.com/zymbol-lang/interpreter |website=GitHub |access-date=2026-04-02}}</ref>

== Background ==

Most programming languages use English reserved words as keywords (e.g., <code>if</code>, <code>while</code>, <code>return</code>, <code>true</code>). This creates an implicit dependency on English literacy for anyone learning to program. Zymbol addresses this by replacing every keyword with a symbol, making the syntactic layer independent of any natural language.

Zymbol is classified as an [[esoteric programming language]] due to its unconventional syntax, but unlike most esolangs it is designed for practical use: it includes a module system, error handling, a [[language server protocol|Language Server Protocol]] (LSP) implementation, a [[REPL]], a code formatter, and two execution backends.

== Design principles ==

# '''No keywords''' — <code>?</code> is ''if'', <code>@</code> is ''loop'', <code><~</code> is ''return''. No natural language dependency.
# '''Full Unicode''' — variable names, function names, comments, and string values accept any Unicode character or grapheme cluster.
# '''Language-agnostic type literals''' — <code>#1</code> / <code>#0</code> instead of <code>true</code> / <code>false</code>; type tags use symbols (<code>###</code>, <code>##"</code>, <code>##?</code>).
# '''Consistent operators''' — the same symbol has the same meaning regardless of which human language is used for identifiers.
# '''Explicit over implicit''' — newlines in output, return values, and scope capture all require explicit syntax.

== Syntax ==

=== Variables and mutability ===

Zymbol distinguishes mutable variables (declared with <code>=</code>) from immutable constants (declared with <code>:=</code>). Augmented assignment operators (<code>+=</code>, <code>-=</code>, <code>*=</code>, <code>/=</code>, <code>%=</code>, <code>^=</code>) and increment/decrement (<code>++</code>, <code>--</code>) are supported. Attempting to reassign a constant produces a runtime error of type <code>##Type</code>.

=== Operator reference ===

{| class="wikitable sortable"
|-
! Category !! Operator !! Meaning !! Notes
|-
| Assignment || <code>=</code> || Mutable variable ||
|-
| Assignment || <code>:=</code> || Immutable constant || Reassignment raises <code>##Type</code>
|-
| Output || <code>>></code> || Print (no automatic newline) || Multiple values by juxtaposition
|-
| Newline || <code>¶</code> or <code>\\</code> || Explicit newline in output || Newlines are never implicit
|-
| Input || <code><<</code> || Read from standard input || Accepts optional prompt string
|-
| If || <code>?</code> || Conditional branch || Braces required even for single statements
|-
| Else if || <code>_?</code> || Else-if branch ||
|-
| Else || <code>_</code> || Else branch || Also used as wildcard in <code>??</code>
|-
| Match || <code>??</code> || Pattern match / switch || Supports ranges, strings, guards, and block arms
|-
| Loop || <code>@</code> || Loop (while / range / for-each / infinite) || Range syntax: <code>i:0..N</code>; with step: <code>i:0..N:S</code>
|-
| Break || <code>@!</code> || Break out of loop || Supports labels for nested loops: <code>@! label</code>
|-
| Continue || <code>@></code> || Continue to next iteration ||
|-
| Lambda || <code>-></code> || Anonymous function || Captures outer scope (closure semantics)
|-
| Return || <code><~</code> || Return value from function || Also marks output parameters in function signatures
|-
| Pipe || <code>&#124;></code> || Pipe value into function || RHS must use <code>_</code> as placeholder for the piped value
|-
| Not-equal || <code><></code> || Inequality || Intentionally distinct from <code>!=</code>
|-
| Exponentiation || <code>^</code> || Power || Integer division between two integers yields an integer
|-
| Length || <code>$#</code> || Length of array or string ||
|-
| Append || <code>$+</code> || Append to array || Returns a new array; <code>$+[i]</code> inserts at index
|-
| Remove || <code>$-</code> || Remove first occurrence by value || <code>$--</code> removes all; <code>$-[i]</code> by index; <code>$-[i..j]</code> range
|-
| Update || <code>$~</code> || Functional update at index || Returns new array; <code>arr[i] = v</code> mutates in place
|-
| Contains || <code>$?</code> || Test membership || <code>$??</code> returns list of all matching indices
|-
| Slice || <code>$[s..e]</code> || Slice array or string || End-exclusive; <code>$[s:count]</code> count-based form
|-
| Sort || <code>$^+</code> / <code>$^-</code> || Sort ascending / descending || <code>$^</code> with a comparator lambda for custom ordering
|-
| Map || <code>$></code> || Map over array || Requires an inline lambda
|-
| Filter || <code>$&#124;</code> || Filter array || Requires an inline lambda
|-
| Reduce || <code>$<</code> || Reduce array || Requires an inline lambda
|-
| String split || <code>/</code> || Split string by delimiter || <code>"a,b,c" / ','</code> → <code>[a, b, c]</code>
|-
| String replace || <code>$~~</code> || Replace substring || Supports max-count: <code>$~~["old":"new":N]</code>
|-
| Try || <code>!?{ }</code> || Try block ||
|-
| Catch || <code>:! ##Type { }</code> || Catch specific error type || <code>:! { }</code> catches any error; <code>_err</code> holds the message
|-
| Finally || <code>:>{ }</code> || Finally block || Always executes
|-
| Is error || <code>$!</code> || Check whether a value is an error ||
|-
| Propagate || <code>$!!</code> || Propagate error to caller ||
|-
| Module declare || <code>#</code> || Declare module name ||
|-
| Export || <code>#>{ }</code> || Export symbols || Exports must precede definitions; supports renaming
|-
| Import || <code><#</code> || Import module ||
|-
| Alias || <code><=</code> || Import alias || Unaliased imports are not supported
|-
| Module call || <code>::</code> || Call a function from a module ||
|-
| Field access || <code>.</code> || Access a named tuple field or module member ||
|-
| Type introspection || <code>#?</code> || Postfix type query || Returns a tuple <code>(type_tag, size_in_digits, value)</code>
|-
| Parse number || <code>#&#124;..&#124;</code> || Parse string to integer or float || Returns original string on failure
|-
| Round || <code>#.N&#124;..&#124;</code> || Round to N decimal places ||
|-
| Truncate || <code>#!N&#124;..&#124;</code> || Truncate to N decimal places ||
|-
| Shell execute || <code><\ cmd \></code> || Execute shell command, capture stdout || String interpolation supported inside command
|}

=== Type system ===

Zymbol uses [[dynamic typing]]. The type of any value can be inspected at runtime with the postfix operator <code>#?</code>, which returns a structured tuple of the form <code>(type_tag, size_in_digits, value)</code>.

{| class="wikitable"
|-
! Type !! Literal example !! Type tag !! Notes
|-
| Integer || <code>42</code>, <code>-7</code>, <code>0xFF</code> || <code>###</code> || 64-bit signed; supports hexadecimal, binary, octal, and decimal literals
|-
| Float || <code>3.14</code>, <code>1.5e10</code> || <code>##.</code> || Scientific notation supported; integer ÷ integer yields integer
|-
| String || <code>"hello"</code> || <code>##"</code> || Interpolation: <code>"Hello {name}"</code>
|-
| Char || <code>'A'</code> || <code>##'</code> || Single Unicode grapheme cluster
|-
| Bool || <code>#1</code>, <code>#0</code> || <code>##?</code> || Not numeric: <code>#1 ≠ 1</code>
|-
| Array || <code>[1, 2, 3]</code> || <code>##]</code> || Zero-indexed; negative indices supported (<code>arr[-1]</code> is the last element)
|-
| Tuple || <code>(a, b)</code>, <code>(x: 1, y: 2)</code> || <code>##)</code> || Named fields accessed by <code>.field</code> or by positional index
|-
| Unit || (no value) || <code>##_</code> || Returned by functions with no explicit return value
|}

=== Scoping and function isolation ===

Named functions in Zymbol have fully isolated scopes: they cannot read or write variables from the enclosing context. This is an intentional design decision to prevent hidden state dependencies.

[[Anonymous function|Lambdas]] (<code>-></code>) use [[closure (computer programming)|closure]] semantics and capture the enclosing scope. Named functions that need to modify the caller's variables do so through '''output parameters''', declared with <code><~</code> in the function signature:

<syntaxhighlight lang="text">
swap(a<~, b<~) {
    tmp = a
    a = b
    b = tmp
}
x = 10
y = 20
swap(x, y)
>> "x=" x " y=" y ¶    // → x=20 y=10
</syntaxhighlight>

=== First-class functions ===

Named functions in Zymbol are not [[first-class function|first-class values]]: they cannot be stored in variables or passed as arguments directly. To use a named function as a [[higher-order function|higher-order argument]], it must be wrapped in a lambda:

<syntaxhighlight lang="text">
double(x) { <~ x * 2 }
nums = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]

result = nums$> (x -> double(x))    // wrapped in a lambda
</syntaxhighlight>

Lambdas are first-class and can be stored in variables, arrays, and passed freely.

=== Destructuring ===

Zymbol supports [[destructuring]] assignment for arrays and tuples. The rest-capture operator <code>*</code> collects remaining array elements; <code>_</code> discards a position:

<syntaxhighlight lang="text">
arr = [10, 20, 30, 40, 50]
[a, b, c]      = arr          // a=10  b=20  c=30
[first, *rest] = arr          // first=10  rest=[20,30,40,50]
[x, _, z]      = [1, 2, 3]   // _ discards position 2

person = (name: "Ana", age: 25, city: "Madrid")
(name: n, age: a) = person   // n="Ana"  a=25
</syntaxhighlight>

=== Pipe operator ===

The pipe operator (<code>|></code>) passes a value into a function. Unlike similar operators in other languages, Zymbol requires an explicit placeholder <code>_</code> on the right-hand side, making the injection point unambiguous when the function takes multiple arguments:

<syntaxhighlight lang="text">
add = (a, b) -> a + b

5 |> add(_, 3)    // → 8   (_ is the piped value)
5 |> add(2, _)    // → 7   (position matters)
</syntaxhighlight>

=== Pattern matching ===

The <code>??</code> operator supports value matching, range matching, guard conditions, and block arms:

<syntaxhighlight lang="text">
// Range match
grade = ?? score {
    90..100 : 'A'
    80..89  : 'B'
    _       : 'F'
}

// Guard match
state = ?? temp {
    _? temp < 0  : "ice"
    _? temp < 20 : "cold"
    _            : "warm"
}
</syntaxhighlight>

=== Shell integration ===

Zymbol can execute shell commands and capture their standard output via the <code><\ cmd \></code> construct. [[String interpolation]] is supported inside the command. This feature is available in the tree-walking backend only.

<syntaxhighlight lang="text">
date    = <\ date +%Y-%m-%d \>
file    = "data.txt"
content = <\ cat {file} \>
</syntaxhighlight>

== Code examples ==

=== Hello, World! ===

<syntaxhighlight lang="text">
>> "Hello, World!" ¶
</syntaxhighlight>

The same program written with Arabic identifiers and string content:

<syntaxhighlight lang="text">
تحية = "مرحبا، أيها العالم!"
>> تحية ¶
</syntaxhighlight>

=== FizzBuzz ===

<syntaxhighlight lang="text">
fizzbuzz(n) {
    ? n % 15 == 0 { <~ "FizzBuzz" }
    _? n % 3  == 0 { <~ "Fizz"     }
    _? n % 5  == 0 { <~ "Buzz"     }
    _ { <~ n }
}

@ i:1..20 { >> fizzbuzz(i) ¶ }
</syntaxhighlight>

=== Fibonacci (recursive) ===

<syntaxhighlight lang="text">
fib(n) {
    ? n <= 1 { <~ n }
    <~ fib(n - 1) + fib(n - 2)
}

@ i:0..9 { >> fib(i) " " }   // → 0 1 1 2 3 5 8 13 21 34
</syntaxhighlight>

=== Higher-order functions ===

<syntaxhighlight lang="text">
nums    = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10]
doubled = nums$> (x -> x * 2)
evens   = nums$| (x -> x % 2 == 0)
total   = nums$< (0, (acc, x) -> acc + x)
>> total ¶    // → 55
</syntaxhighlight>

=== Error handling ===

<syntaxhighlight lang="text">
!? {
    data = read_file("config.txt")
} :! ##IO {
    >> "File not found" ¶
} :! ##Parse {
    >> "Parse error" ¶
} :! {
    >> "Unknown error: " _err ¶
} :> {
    >> "Cleanup done" ¶
}
</syntaxhighlight>

Error types: <code>##IO</code>, <code>##Network</code>, <code>##Parse</code>, <code>##Index</code>, <code>##Type</code>, <code>##Div</code>, <code>##_</code> (generic catch-all).

=== Module system ===

<syntaxhighlight lang="text">
// lib/math.zy
# math
#> { add, get_PI }

_PI := 3.14159
add(a, b) { <~ a + b }
get_PI()   { <~ _PI  }
</syntaxhighlight>

<syntaxhighlight lang="text">
// main.zy
<# ./lib/math <= m

>> m::add(5, 3) ¶    // → 8
pi = m::get_PI()
>> pi ¶               // → 3.14159
</syntaxhighlight>

== Internationalization ==

Because Zymbol has no English keywords, programs written in any [[writing system]] are syntactically identical to programs written in any other. Operators remain constant; only identifiers, string contents, and comments vary.

A program written entirely in [[Arabic script|Arabic]], [[Japanese writing system|Japanese]], [[Cherokee syllabary|Cherokee Syllabics]], or [[Klingon language|Klingon]] pIqaD is structurally equivalent to one written in Latin script — no translation layer or preprocessing is required. The [[Unicode]] [[grapheme cluster]] model ensures that scripts with complex glyph composition ([[Devanagari]], [[Thai script|Thai]], [[Burmese script|Burmese]], [[Unified Canadian Aboriginal Syllabics|Cree Syllabics]]) are handled correctly at the lexer level.

== Computational class ==

Zymbol is [[Turing completeness|Turing complete]]. It provides:

* Unbounded loops (<code>@</code> with arbitrary while-conditions)
* Arbitrary [[recursion (computer science)|recursion]] (with [[tail call]] optimization in the VM backend)
* Dynamic arrays of unlimited size
* 64-bit signed integer arithmetic

== Implementation ==

The reference implementation is written in [[Rust (programming language)|Rust]] and structured as a workspace of 17 crates:

{| class="wikitable"
|-
! Component !! Role
|-
| Lexer / Parser || Produces an [[abstract syntax tree|AST]] from <code>.zy</code> source; handles Unicode grapheme clusters natively
|-
| Semantic analyzer || [[Type checking]], unused variable analysis, circular import detection
|-
| Tree-walking interpreter || Default execution path; supports all language features
|-
| Bytecode compiler + Register VM || Optional backend (invoked with <code>--vm</code>); approximately 4× faster on recursive workloads; partial module system support
|-
| LSP server || [[Language Server Protocol]] implementation via tower-lsp and Tokio
|-
| Formatter || Configurable-indentation code formatter
|-
| REPL || Interactive [[read–eval–print loop]] with command history
|}

The two execution backends can be selected at runtime:

<syntaxhighlight lang="text">
zymbol run program.zy           # tree-walker (default, fully featured)
zymbol run --vm program.zy      # register VM (~4× faster)
zymbol repl                     # interactive REPL
zymbol check program.zy         # syntax and semantic check only
zymbol fmt program.zy --write   # format source file in place
</syntaxhighlight>

== See also ==

* [[Brainfuck]] — minimalist language with a small operator set
* [[Befunge]] — symbolic, stack-based esoteric language
* [[Unlambda]] — purely functional language with minimal syntax
* [[Esoteric programming language]]
* [[Unicode in programming languages]]

== External links ==

* [https://zymbol-lang.org Official website]
* [https://github.com/zymbol-lang/interpreter Interpreter source code (GitHub)]
* [https://github.com/zymbol-lang/interpreter/blob/main/zymbol.ebnf Formal EBNF grammar]
* [https://esolangs.org/wiki/Zymbol-Lang Zymbol-Lang on Esolangs wiki]

== References ==

{{reflist}}

[[Category:Esoteric programming languages]]
[[Category:Programming languages created in 2026]]
[[Category:Dynamically typed programming languages]]
[[Category:Rust (programming language)]]
[[Category:Unicode]]
[[Category:Functional programming languages]]
[[Category:Imperative programming languages]]
[[Category:Free software programmed in Rust]]
[[Category:Programming languages with an interpreter]]
